Well, good afternoon.
My name is JD Mankovsky,
and I manage Apple's
Enterprise Professional Services team
for the U.S., and we actually
do quite a bit of large enterprise
deployments around server storage,
email, backup, XAN deployments.
And today I'm here to talk about
enterprise messaging solutions.
And for those of you who might
have been to WWDC before,
we've done this for the past few years.
So I'm here to give you another
update as to where we are compared
to probably about 12 months ago.
So here's our website as well if you
want more information on what we do,
apple.com slash services.
So we're going to first give you
an update on the client side.
And talk about some
updates from Microsoft,
IBM, Novell.
And then we'll talk about
some OS X server solutions.
So for those of you who are interested
in deploying both collaboration
solutions on our platform,
both on the server and
on the client side,
we'll talk about those.
Mixed in some success
stories with those solutions.
And then we'll just finish up the
session and open it up for Q&A.
There'll be Q&A with myself,
and then there's some people from
the Microsoft team who are available.
available that you can
talk to after the session.
So first let me give you a
quick update on Groupware
Enterprise client solutions for the Mac.
And obviously,
how many people in the room here
use Microsoft Entourage or Exchange?
Yeah, quite a bit of you.
Yeah, yeah.
How many people here use IBM Lotus Notes?
Okay.
And Novell?
Okay, that makes a lot of sense.
So, um, well...
It makes a lot of sense.
I mean, it's kind of what we see
on the services side.
There's definitely a lot of people
that use Exchange out there.
So what I'd like to do is kind
of focus on kind of some of the,
an update from Microsoft,
and first talk about the
Mac OS X client for the Mac,
which is mainly Entourage 2004.
That's what the majority of the
clients use nowadays on the Mac,
and Microsoft has done some pretty
significant improvements to Entourage
over the past few revisions,
and we'll talk about that.
For those of you who really want
the full Outlook experience,
and who feel like Entourage is not
sufficient for your requirements,
well, obviously the Microsoft team
would love to hear,
you know, what other features do
you need on the Mac.
But if you're... If you
do want the full Outlook,
you can use RDC, which is the Microsoft,
you know, remote desktop client.
Outlook Web Access,
so they obviously have Web Access.
And then, obviously,
some of you might be running Parallel
already on your new MacBooks or
MacBook Pros or Mac Pro machines.
But Parallel is a great,
great solution to run any
Windows application on the Mac.
And then, obviously,
some of you might have seen
the announcement from VMware,
which they are also porting over.
So, you could potentially run that
through a VMware container.
Obviously,
Outlook Web Access is important,
especially when a lot of us travel and
need to quickly connect and check email.
You can go to a cyber cafe or wherever
and just get to your email very quickly.
And the Microsoft team has been pretty
hard at work to make sure that they
have very nice support for Safari.
And with the next version
of Exchange Server,
version 2007,
they have significantly improved
the richness of the content being
displayed through the Safari web
browser using Outlook Web Access.
Here's a screenshot of
what RDC would look like.
And I'm sure a lot of you use RDC.
Even a lot of Mac IT people who
want to administrate Windows 2000,
Windows 2003 servers.
And Microsoft actually announced
today that they're in the process of,
they will be releasing in the
future a universal binary version
of the RDC client on our platform.
this year.
Entourage 2004.
So when we talked about
Entourage last year,
this is kind of where we were, right?
There was synchronization of emails,
there was, you know,
scheduling available,
there's global address list directory,
form-based authentication support,
delegate support, which was, you know,
not quite what we wanted.
And then, obviously, you know,
it's a Mac,
it's the native Mac OS X product.
And here's a, you know,
a nice screenshot of what, you know,
Entourage 2004 looks like.
I'm sure a lot of you are
familiar with that UI,
but, you know, in this case,
you can see you've got free busy,
you can invite quite a
few people to a meeting,
and it does what it needs to do, right?
To go to a Senate meeting to a
bunch of people at the same time.
Last year when we talked,
the Service Pack 2 release was not
available at last developer conference.
And Microsoft said,
this is what we're working on.
And the good news is they released
Service Pack 2 in early 2006.
And from what we heard,
it significantly helped the
integration of the Mac platform
within an exchange environment.
And so the Mac BU has been really hard
at work to make sure that the needs
of the Mac client integrating with an
exchange environment are well served.
And they did a pretty good job
with this Service Pack 2 release.
And we'll go into some of the key
details behind SP2 in just a second.
So obviously, you know,
global address lists,
you go to look up addresses
are very important.
That was significantly improved.
The fact that you can tie in
multiple calendars and look up
multiple users' calendars and address
book views within the product,
that was a pretty big significant
request from the users.
Obviously, delegation was big.
Full support for delegation was crucial.
Obviously, you know,
when you have an admin and she
needs to update your calendar,
those are all, you know,
really key features.
Sharing was greatly improved
and then public support,
you know, there was some feedback
that the public folders,
some were showing up, some were not.
It was kind of slow.
Things got a lot, you know,
significantly better in the SP2 release.
Obviously, client-server synchronization
was something else.
As the mailboxes were
getting significantly big,
there was also some slowdowns there.
They did a really good job on that side.
And sync services as well.
So being able to integrate with iSync and
syncing your address book and your iCal
with Entourage are pretty neat features,
especially when you need to then sync
with a PDA or a Trio or something.
It makes it pretty easy.
Pretty neat.
On the server side,
things are pretty straightforward.
I mean, what do you need to support
entourage on the Mac?
Well, pretty much Exchange 2000, 2003,
with Service Pack 2 or later.
If you want to take advantage
of some of the newer features,
the new OWA features, we encourage,
or Microsoft encourages you as well,
to test the 2007 server, Beta 2,
which is available.
And then obviously,
Outlook Web Access needs to be enabled,
which is pretty straightforward.
WebDAV and LDAP need to be turned
on as well on the server side.
So that's kind of a quick
update on the entourage side.
As far as some of the collaboration
tools that are out there,
how many people here
use Microsoft Messenger?
[Transcript missing]
Server-side requirements for Messenger,
again, the live communication server,
Service Pack 1,
or the Microsoft Office communication
server,
which is in beta.
That's the next version, version 2007,
as well as support for the live
communication server 2005 for
the public IMing connectivity.
So if you want to be able to
do IMs across the Internet to
other types of chat services.
Let me quickly talk about SharePoint.
So how many people here use or have
SharePoint deployed within their company?
Okay, so quite a few of you.
So the good news is Microsoft has
also been working pretty
hard to support Safari.
And in the SharePoint version 3,
they're definitely adding
some significant support.
Microsoft is now using
the ASP.NET version 2,
which has the Safari and
Firefox support in there.
And in this case,
we're showing their project
document management screenshot here.
And pretty much, you know,
everything you can do on the PC side,
you'll be able to do on the Mac through
the Safari browser in terms of,
you know,
document and project management here.
So that's really exciting.
Here's a view of the project task
view in SharePoint version 3.
Now obviously they're
also going to support,
you know, Wiki and Blog.
That's part of the SharePoint product,
their collaboration product,
and that's also supported
through the Safari browser.
Here's another screenshot of the
SharePoint version 3 running in Safari.
You can see that the rendering, I mean,
everything looks pretty
nice within Safari,
which is really good news
for the enterprise world.
This is something that's
important to mention.
How many people here are Mac IT people?
Wow.
Yeah.
Okay.
So, I don't know if-- how many of you
have seen this document or have
downloaded this document before?
Okay, a few of you.
So,
this is-- this is a significant document.
The BU team has spent a lot
of time putting it together,
and it's something that you
should-- you should all download,
which really clearly explains
how to integrate Macs,
you know,
and-- and our servers and-- and Apple--
how to use Apple Remote Desktop,
how to use, uh, PackageMaker,
how to use a lot of the
Apple tools within your Microsoft,
you know, your Mac,
Microsoft IT environment,
and integrate it well within
your overall enterprise,
um, you know, deployment.
And when you're looking for ammunition
as to why do you need an XServe,
for example, for the-- the Mac people,
um, when you have, you know,
a large group of Mac users doing
publishing work or working on a lot of,
you know, office documents,
and your-- your CIO is asking you, "Well,
why can't we run this off a, you know,
Windows server?" Um,
there's some really good
information in there that explains,
well, you know, if you deploy an XServe
and you deploy AFP,
Microsoft actually supports
launching documents over
the network using an XServe.
So that-- all-- all that information
is contained in the document,
so I-- I strongly recommend
that you look at it,
'cause it has a lot of
really good info as far as,
you know, deploying-- uh,
deploying Office and integ--
integrating the-- the-- the Macs,
you know, the-- the-- the Macs
into this enterprise,
you know, Microsoft environment.
That a lot of us run into when
we deal with large enterprises.
So check it out.
It has a lot of good content in it.
Obviously, you hear that at Macworld when
ROS comes on stage last January and
their commitment to shipping a
universal binary version of Office.
The good news is now the entire
code has been ported over to Xcode.
So this is huge.
The team is really hard
at work at getting Office,
the next version of Office out,
and running it on Intel natively.
And obviously, Microsoft, again,
is very committed to
the Macintosh platform,
and they publicly indicated that with
a five-year commitment to develop
Office on both PowerPC and Intel.
So again, and we probably have eight
Microsoft people in the room
today that are available,
again, to answer your questions
after the session.
So there's a lot of Microsoft developers
at this conference this week,
so we're very excited.
And then obviously in terms of resources,
I just wanted to highlight those again.
There's a lot of resources available from
Microsoft to support the Mac community.
And if you go to
Microsoft.com/exchange or /mac,
you'll get to all those other resources
that are up there on the slide right now.
So that's the Microsoft update.
And what I wanted to do now
is quickly talk about IBM.
And obviously,
there was a few people in the
room who use IBM solutions.
And the first one I wanted to highlight
is IBM WebSphere Portal version 6.
And that product was made
available on July 26.
And that actually has full
support for the Safari,
for Safari 2.0 and above
for the Safari browser.
So that's really good news.
As far as, you know,
workplace solutions from IBM, obviously,
IBM Workplace Content Management,
version 6, supports Sapphire 2.0.
On the collaboration products,
the IBM team is hard at work to
release the next version of their
collaboration product suite,
which will be, you know,
the workplace team collaboration,
the documents, the workplace documents,
as well as the collaborative
learning suite,
which will be fully supported on the
Mac and on Intel in the near future.
Lotus Notes and Domino.
So right now,
the version that's currently
available is version 6.5.5,
and that obviously runs natively
on PowerPC and runs under
Rosetta on the Intel Macs,
and that is fully
qualified under Rosetta,
so there's no issues there.
The next version of Notes Domino,
which is 7.0.2,
which will be the first universal
binary release on the IBM side.
And that also has some
nice same-time messaging.
How many people here use same-time?
Okay, so that's significant.
So integration of same-time
messaging within the next release,
the 7.0.2 product.
And then obviously the Web Access 7.0.2,
support using Firefox on Mac.
Mac OS X.
Here's a screenshot of the
Lotus SameTime 7.5 product,
which is coming soon.
And that not only has chat,
but also has voice over IP built in.
It has embedded screenshots.
You can do that.
That is supported within a chat,
as well as history.
You go to save all your chats.
Creating some custom plug-ins using
the Eclipse development suite.
And we actually have, I believe tomorrow,
we have a session around
Eclipse on the Mac platform.
So it's something that
you might want to go to.
As well as dynamic allocation
awareness built into the 7.5 product.
So now let's talk about,
quickly about Novell.
And Novell, group-wise,
is their collaboration server solution.
And they released version 7 in
the June timeframe this year.
And they have Mac Intel,
so they have a native Mac Intel client,
which was released in June.
They have iCal support.
And for those of you who went to the
calendaring session this morning,
Novell actually does already
support the CalDAV standard,
which is what Apple is adopting on the
client side and on the server side.
So they have CalDAV support
within group-wise 7.
As well as support for our IPv6,
shared contacts with Outlook Connector.
So they have an Outlook Connector
shipping within group-wise,
as well as many bug fixes.
They also announced their
GroupWise Mobile Server.
Obviously, a lot of us carry Trios,
clear BlackBerry, you know,
carry Symbian OS-based phones.
And so they actually have a pretty
interesting product there in terms of,
you know,
wirelessly syncing all your data
via pretty much any carrier,
or even using, you know, 802.11,
you know, Wi-Fi type devices.
Here's an example of the list of
products they actually support within
the GroupWise Mobility product.
You can see it's a pretty large
gamut of support in terms of mobile
devices within the Novell product.
For any additional information on Novell,
please go to novell.com/groupwise
or gwmac.com is another really great
website to get more information on that.
So that's kind of a quick
update on the top three,
I would say,
collaboration client solutions that
a lot of education and enterprise
companies run on the Mac platform.
What I wanted to do now is
talk about server solutions.
And obviously today,
our goal is to talk about
third-party solutions.
There's a lot of sessions around
Apple's Mail Server and Leopard
Server and our new iCal server.
And we're not going to spend any
time in this session about this.
There's three or four
sessions at WWDC around that.
But what I want to do is spend some
time on some of the third-party
products that we've seen have
been adopted by the Macintosh
community and have been deployed
on XServes and on Mac OS X Server.
And the two products that we've seen
have been deployed greatly are Cario.
How many people here
use Cario in the room?
Okay.
And then Zimbra.
How many people here use
Zimbra or have tested Zimbra?
Yep.
So we're going to talk about Cario first.
[Transcript missing]
So it's a real complete
collaboration service solution.
It's a mail server,
it's a calendar server,
it has a lot of really cool features,
tasks, notes, folders,
public folders are all in there.
Obviously,
it fully supports POP and IMAP,
which is pretty much standard
for any mail server out there.
It has also full anti-spam,
virus checking is all built in.
It has some really nice web mail support.
It's multi-platform, obviously,
and they have some really nice
connectivity for the Entourage client
and the Outlook client on the PC side.
So Entourage support
is pretty much native,
so if your users use
Entourage on the Mac side,
they can just keep using that
and you can pretty much migrate
the server back in from an
Exchange server over to Cario server.
They have a really nice
tool that allows you to.
migrate that, but not touch any of the
clients' PCs or Macs.
Just have them keep running
Outlook on the PC and keep
using Entourage on the Mac.
They have backup tools,
which are built in, which is very neat,
so you don't have to deploy any
third party backup for this.
And they've had some really
good awards in the past 12
months from different magazines.
What I also like about Cario is
they fully integrate within our
open directory and active directory.
So again, if you've already
deployed active directory,
you don't have to worry about anything.
You just tie Cario right in.
They have a bunch of attributes.
You have to extend the schema.
They have all that
available on their website.
It's pretty much double
click and install.
And same thing on the
open directory side.
The Admin Console is something
you can run on Mac OS X,
on Linux, or on Windows.
It's pretty straightforward.
Here's a screenshot of
their administration tools.
Again, I think they're very
easy to use and manage,
which makes your life as an
IT mail administrator a lot easier.
And again, something you can run remotely
from pretty much anywhere
on pretty much any platform.
[Transcript missing]
They just released version 6.2,
which is a universal binary release,
so we're really happy about that.
This is actually perfect
timing with our new server.
And they've added a couple
things in terms of their web UI,
especially when you have a
lot of users hitting Cario.
They added AJAX support,
so the UI is a lot faster.
They have SpamAssassin, McAfee,
also engines.
They have ClamAV if you want
to do for email scanning.
You can do ClamAV if you want,
which is open source and free,
as well as sticky note support.
Quickly, I wanted to talk about one of
the success stories they've had.
This is a hosting company
called Socketworks,
and they're based in Sun Valley, Idaho.
And they do web, email, database design,
hosting, and they're running Cario.
They've got about 800 email
users running on Cario,
and previously that
company was using 4D mail.
And some of the top features that
they really liked about Cario,
which I think is important,
is the web mail mini support.
If you don't know what that is,
obviously I'm sure none of you
here are running OS 9 anymore.
But if you are,
you can actually get to your email.
But any other mobile device,
which as you know,
mobile devices have kind of
lightweight web browsers.
Those allow you to connect and
to get to your email through
the web interface using their
using their kind of
light version of this.
Obviously, they have web-based domain
administration built in,
and again,
it's a very cost-effective product.
If you go to their website
for about 20 users,
you're talking about $700 for
the software for about 20 users,
so it's pretty
For more information,
you can contact Cario.
Just go to info@cario.com
or go to www.cario.com.
and I think there is someone from Cario.
Yep, John.
Yep, so John is here from Cario as
well if you want to talk to
him later after the session.
Another product that I'm very
excited to talk about is Zimbra.
So this is a company that we've been
working with on the professional services
side for probably about 18 months.
So it was a hush-hush company.
They were showing us the product.
We were very excited.
And then obviously last March, I believe,
they released their first
Mac OS X Server product.
They have kind of two
versions of their product.
They have an open source version,
which you can download.
You can download the Zimbra
Collaboration Suite Server on Mac OS X.
It's free.
And then if you want, obviously,
support and clustering and a bunch
of other sync services support,
then you have to basically pay something
of the order of $28 per user per year.
But they have an open source version,
which is great because
you can download it,
test it, and see if it works.
And if you want kind of
the advanced features,
you can buy the product.
It's a very innovative solution.
It's a very scalable mail solution.
The team, the Zimbra team,
comes from backgrounds like phone.com,
and a lot of people come from Sun.
So they're familiar with
building very large,
scalable enterprise mail solutions.
And they're... They have support like,
you know, obviously, XServe support,
XSAN support for distributed mail and,
you know, large-scale mail deployments,
which we'll talk about in just a bit.
They've also, obviously,
we gave them a lot of
feedback in terms of,
you know, sync services support.
They obviously support mail,
but they also sync with iCal
and AddressBook as well.
Some customers they have right now,
again, it's a new product.
Like I said, they just released the
OS X version a few months ago.
But HNR... HNR Block is a
company that has deployed Zimbra.
TBW Chai Day also is currently testing
the Zimbra suite on our platform,
on the Mac OS X server platform,
and looking at deploying that, you know,
company-wide.
and Dave uses that internally as well.
And what's really interesting,
they gave me that info yesterday,
is they're seeing over a
thousand downloads of the
Mac OS X Server product per month,
which is right behind
their VMware container,
which runs on pretty much any other
platform that VMware might support.
So they're very excited about the
support and the feedback they're
getting from the Apple community.
And we're beating, you know,
Linux and some of the other
versions they might have up there.
We're the number two download
per month on their platform.
As far as a quick product
overview on the Zimbra side,
now again,
when I was talking to Andy at Zimbra,
they gave me like 20
bullets to talk about.
And obviously,
20 bullets don't fit in a single slide.
So I had to kind of trim it down
and go to like the top five or
six features built into Zimbra.
But I strongly recommend you
just go to their website.
They have a beautiful kind of flash demo.
You can even download a demo
account and test it and kind
of check out their interface.
Slides are great, but checking out the
demo is well worth it.
They've got a very rich AJAX client.
It's probably the first
AJAX mail solution that I saw,
which is truly amazing in terms of
the richness of what it can offer.
Almost as good as a native
client mail solution.
They've got calendaring built in.
They've got free busy built in.
They've got mobile.
So they support
Blackberry through Notify.
And then they have
smartphone support built in.
So you don't have to buy any
additional package that's
just built into the product.
They have Zimlets.
So here's a great example of that.
So they've got integration
within Salesforce and Oracle.
So let's say you have an email
that has like a PO number.
You can generate a Zimlet.
And as people click in the email,
and the PO, it literally can launch,
and bring up the PO.
So they've got some pretty neat
integration within Salesforce and
Oracle and pretty much anything else.
They can customize that to tie into
SAP or any other backend system.
They also have a new document editor,
which is built in.
So think of it as, again,
kind of a blog document type system built
into the-- it's called Zimbra Documents.
And I believe that's in beta right now,
right?
And that'll be shipping
in the next few weeks.
And again, it's like a wiki blog type
thing built into the product.
and, you know,
allows you to embed images, spreadsheets,
do a whole bunch of really fun stuff,
thanks to the richness of Ajax.
On the admin side, again,
there was like 20 features
I had to go through,
so I trimmed that down to about five.
But there's a lot of really
cool things on the admin side.
They have online backup.
They've got single mailbox restores,
obviously.
They've got HSM support,
which is pretty neat.
Obviously, if you're an enterprise,
probably you'll run your tier
one email on some potential
pretty expensive storage.
And then as those emails get older,
you want to move them to XServe raids,
for example.
And so the product has that built in.
And obviously, anti-spam, anti-virus,
as well as the admin runs on a Mac Mini,
for example.
So what a perfect use for that.
Here's one of their case
studies on the education side.
So Eastern Illinois University has
deployed Zimbra.
And this is going to
support about 30,000 users.
So we can see the
scalability of the product.
Again, we'll show a good
diagram in just a minute,
but it's all running on XSERVs,
as well as the back end is
using our XAN shared storage.
And here's a diagram
of what it looks like,
where you have the MTA servers,
you've got your directory
or LDAP servers,
and then you have, using IP failover,
you've got a set of
pairs of mailbox servers,
and all that is,
all those servers are tied in over
a fiber channel to the XAN back end.
So obviously your mail storage is
on a central shared storage system,
which is using XAN,
and then all the mail servers,
as you need more mailbox servers,
you can just add them up,
and all those mail
servers talk to the XAN.
And each server has its
own IP failover set up.
So pretty straightforward,
pretty much how you would deploy kind of
an enterprise class mail server solution.
And again,
that's something that my team does.
So if you have any questions,
let us know.
Pricing and Information.
So again, the subscription is,
like I said, about $28 per year per user.
Obviously,
they have significant discounts
for governmenteducation.org,
you know, organization.
So, you know, just let them know,
give them a call.
Sales or email sales at Zimbra.com.
And Andy is from Zimbra.
He's actually here.
He's got his nice black Zimbra
and red Zimbra shirts if you
want to talk to him afterwards.
You can come up.
Thank you.
So there's a lot of things
we haven't talked about.
I just wanted to make sure that
we focused on a couple of really
key solutions here on the client
side and on the server side.
But obviously,
people might use Communigate.
That's also available.
I think Communigate runs on
probably 40 different platforms.
So we don't want to-- Mac OS X is
one of the platforms they support.
Cario, Novell, some of you might be
running Evolution as well,
which Novell has an Evolution client
available for the Mac.
And that's available as well.
Some people might be using Snurdware to
integrate with their exchange back end.
That's also a great solution
available on the Mac platform.
So I just wanted to make sure that
we talked about these people and
made you aware that some of those
solutions are available on our platform.